# Fitted Information Tree

 Agentic affordance and context design pattern. A document data structure optimized for agent use.

## What Is It?

A Fitted Information Tree (FIT) is a way to structure information in an agent and context friendly way.
It allows just the right amount of information to be accessed for any given activity or task.
It leaves pointers in context for accessing additional information (via subdocuments) as the session evolves and more information becomes relevant.

It is not a summarization technique (the intent is to preserve all information available in a document) but it can leverage summarization to optimize access patterns and context usage.

This repository contains python scripts for turning a standard large markdown file into a FIT.
It also contains agent Skills for using and creating FITs.

## How to Use It? (Agentic Skill)

Follow this procedure when reading a document structured as a fitted information tree.

When it seems relevant to a task, read the root node file.
This relevance assessment might be based on memory, a simple prompt in AGENTS.md, a user prompt or your own intuition and initiative.
Once you've read the document, read any linked documents relevant to the task at hand. 
Read only documents relevant to the task.
Examine any token load information (optionally included in parentheses after the link) and avoid documents that are too large (>5k tokens).
If additional nodes become relevant later in a session, read them before proceeding.
Follow this procedure recursively down the tree.


## How to Generate One? (Agentic Skill)

Follow this pattern when creating and editing documents that are likely to be read by an agent and loaded completely into context.

The top level node is a reasonably sized (3k tokens or less) overview document that links to subdocuments that contain additional details.
If one of those subdocuments subsequently grows too large, it becomes an overview with links to subdocuments.

Sub-documents are located in a folder named after the original document, lowercased and without the extension (e.g. `BERNARD.md` links to `bernard/model-candidates.md`)
Links to subdocuments should use relative file paths in standard markdown link format where both the link text and target are the same. (e.g. [bernard/model-candidates.md](bernard/model-candidates.md))
Links to subdocuments should also include a parenthetical token estimate after the link for smarter agent context management (e.g. (~1760 tokens)). May be estimated at ~4 chars per token.

Documents over 3k tokens should be refactored. Documents should never exceed 5k tokens.
If the document is also a system file, also follow any other relevant guidelines for editing system files.

# FIT Level
A FIT can be constructed with increasing levels of capability (available intelligence) and a priori query and task knowledge.

Implementation of Levels up to 1.5 are in-progress. Higher level implementations are planned.

One might ask, "Why bother with lower levels?"

The answer is that FITs are intended to provide agentic support at multiple context sizes and capabilities. Involving a powerful LLM in the optimization of context for a simple one isn't practical and limits utility. Providing simple methods for FIT generation enables even less powerful LLMs (for example small local LLMs) to benefit. Allowing them to, in turn, provide context management and other support to more powerful LLMs (perhaps via query and task optimized FITs).

Level 4 is the aspirational standard. Each lower level asks: how close can we get with only the capabilities available?

## Level 0
Unfitted document.

## Level 1: Structural FIT
Document fitted with structural information. Relies on original document author to supply relevant semantics via structural elements in the markdown. Result is an agent navigable document tree that fits size constraints.
Capability level is Mechanical.

### Level 1.5 Structural FIT with Code Block Optimization
Structural FIT that also utilizes code block annotations supplied by original document author. Relevant programming languages (in a prioritized list) will be given space proximal to the root as space permits.

## Level 2: Weak Semantic FIT
Document fitted with basic text processing. Important elements and summarizing content are identified and inlined/hoisted with basic text processing methods.

### Level 2.5: Weak Semantic FIT with Query Optimization
Weak Semantic FIT optimized for access by matches to a small "search query". In addition to the existing prioritization and summarization, text is prioritized for inclusion (root proximity) based on matches to that query.

## Level 3: Strong Text FIT
Document fitted with LLM.
Fitted document structure is optimized via LLM. Important elements are identified and summaries are generated by the LLM. Root proximity is determined by the LLM.

### Level 3.5: Strong Text FIT with query optimization
Document fitted to query with LLM. Text proximity to root is determined by the LLM based on a shallow query.

## Level 4: Task Optimized FIT
Document is fitted to a specific task via a capable LLM. An LLM is provided with deep task context and constructs the FIT to enable access optimized for the given task. General information and information relevant to earlier task steps is prioritized and included as close to the root node as possible. Later task steps and details are deferred to subdocuments to enable loading only the necessary information as close as possible to its relevant activity. No information is lost. All information is still made available via subdocuments, its proximity to the root is lessened and context load potentially increased based on its percieved relevance to the task. 